=pod

=head1 NAME

Net::BitTorrent::DHT - BitTorrent Mainline DHT implementation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use Net::BitTorrent::DHT;

    my $dht = Net::BitTorrent::DHT->new(
        node_id_bin => pack('H*', '0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567'),
        port        => 6881,
        address     => '0.0.0.0' # Optional: bind to specific address
    );

    # Bootstrap the routing table
    $dht->bootstrap();

    # In your event loop:
    while (1) {
        my ($new_nodes, $found_peers) = $dht->tick(0.1);
        # ... process results ...
    }

    # Or run in a blocking loop:
    # $dht->run();

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<Net::BitTorrent::DHT> implements the BitTorrent Mainline DHT protocol (BEP 5) with IPv6 extensions (BEP 32). It uses
L<Algorithm::Kademlia> for its core routing logic and L<Net::BitTorrent::Protocol::BEP03::Bencode> for wire
serialization.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 C<new( node_id_bin =E<gt> ..., [ port =E<gt> 6881, address =E<gt> ..., want_v4 =E<gt> 1, want_v6 =E<gt> 1, bep32 =E<gt> 1, bep51 =E<gt> 1, timeout =E<gt> 0 ] )>

Constructor. C<node_id_bin> must be a 20-byte binary string.

=over

=item C<want_v4>

Enable or disable IPv4 support. Defaults to 1.

=item C<want_v6>

Enable or disable IPv6 support. Defaults to 1.

=item C<bep32>

Enable or disable BEP 32 (IPv6 extensions). When enabled, C<find_node> and C<get_peers> responses will include both
C<nodes> and C<nodes6> fields. Defaults to 1.

=item C<bep33>

Enable or disable BEP 33 (DHT Scraping). When enabled, the node will support C<scrape_peers> queries and
C<announce_peer> will include the C<seed> flag. Defaults to 1.

=item C<bep44>

Enable or disable BEP 44 (Storing Arbitrary Data in the DHT). When enabled, the node will support C<get> and C<put>
queries for immutable and mutable data. Defaults to 1.

=item C<bep51>

Enable or disable BEP 51 (Infohash Indexing). When enabled, the node will support C<sample_infohashes> queries.
Defaults to 1.

=item C<read_only>

When set to a true value, the node will include the C<ro> flag (BEP 43) in all queries, indicating that it should not
be added to the routing tables of remote nodes. Defaults to 0.

=back

=head2 C<bootstrap( )>

Seeds the routing table by querying a set of hardcoded bootstrap nodes (routers). This is typically the first method
called after instantiation to join the DHT network.

=head2 C<ping( $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<ping> query to the specified address and port.

=head2 C<find_node_remote( $target_id, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<find_node> query for the specified 20-byte target ID.

=head2 C<get_peers( $info_hash, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<get_peers> query for the specified info-hash.

=head2 C<get_remote( $target, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<get> query (BEP 44) for the specified target.

=head2 C<put_remote( \%args, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<put> query (BEP 44). C<\%args> must contain C<v> (value) and for mutable data also C<k> (public key), C<sig>
(signature), C<seq> (sequence number), and optionally C<salt> and C<cas>.

=head2 C<scrape_peers_remote( $info_hash, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<scrape_peers> query (BEP 33) for the specified info-hash.

=head2 C<sample_infohashes_remote( $target, $addr, $port )>

Sends a C<sample_infohashes> query (BEP 51) to the specified address. C<$target> is a 20-byte binary string.

=head2 C<export_state( )>

Returns a HASH reference containing the current node ID, routing tables (IPv4 and IPv6), peer storage, and hosted
mutable data. This is useful for persisting the DHT state between restarts.

=head2 C<import_state( $state )>

Restores the DHT state from a HASH reference previously returned by C<export_state()>. This includes routing tables,
peer storage, and hosted mutable data.

=head2 C<tick( [ $timeout ] )>

Processes any incoming UDP packets. Returns three list references: C<$new_nodes>, C<$found_peers>, and C<$data>.
C<$new_nodes> is a list of newly discovered nodes. C<$found_peers> is a list of discovered peers. C<$data> is a hash
reference of data if a BEP 44 'get' response was received or BEP 51 samples if 'sample_infohashes' response was
received. C<$timeout> is the maximum time to wait for data (in seconds).

=head2 C<handle_incoming( )>

Reads a single packet from the socket and processes it. Returns the same three list references as C<tick()>. Use this
if you are using your own event loop (e.g., C<IO::Async>).

=head2 C<run( )>

Enters an infinite loop calling C<tick()>.

=head1 BEP 44 SUPPORT

BEP 44 (Storing Arbitrary Data in the DHT) requires an Ed25519 implementation for signing and verifying mutable data.
C<Net::BitTorrent::DHT> automatically detects and uses one of the following modules, in order of preference:

=over

=item 1. L<Crypt::PK::Ed25519>

=item 2. L<Crypt::Perl::Ed25519::PublicKey>

=back

If none of these modules are available, BEP 44 support will be automatically disabled (C<bep44> will be set to 0).

=head1 IPv6 SUPPORT

This module fully supports BEP 32. It correctly handles the C<nodes6> field in responses and supports 18-byte compact
IPv6 peer addresses in C<values>.

=head1 EVENT LOOP INTEGRATION

This module is designed to be protocol-agnostic regarding the event loop.

=head2 Using with IO::Select (Default)

Simply call C<tick($timeout)> in your own loop.

=head2 Using with IO::Async

    my $handle = IO::Async::Handle->new(
        handle => $dht->socket,
        on_read_ready => sub {
            my ($nodes, $peers) = $dht->handle_incoming();
            # ...
        },
    );
    $loop->add($handle);

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Algorithm::Kademlia>, L<Net::BitTorrent::Protocol::BEP03::Bencode>

L<https://www.bittorrent.org/beps/bep_0005.html>,  L<https://www.bittorrent.org/beps/bep_0032.html>

=head1 AUTHOR

Sanko Robinson E<lt>sanko@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2023-2026 by Sanko Robinson.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.

=cut
